

Albert Einstein was a German mathematician and theoretical physicist, (1878-1955) who developed the special and general theories of relativity, now considered the cornerstone of modern physics. For his discovery of the photoelectric effect, essentially his contributions to quantum theory, he had been awarded the Nobel Prize in 1921. 

A hallmark of Albert Einstein's career was his use of visualized thought experiments (German: Gedankenexperiment) as a fundamental tool for understanding physical issues and for elucidating his concepts to others. Einstein's thought experiments took diverse forms. In his youth, he mentally chased beams of light. For special relativity, he employed moving trains and flashes of lightning to explain his most penetrating insights. For general relativity, he considered a person falling off a roof, accelerating elevators, blind beetles crawling on curved surfaces and the like. In his debates with Niels Bohr on the nature of reality, he proposed imaginary devices intended to show, at least in concept, how the Heisenberg uncertainty principle might be evaded. In a profound contribution to the literature on quantum mechanics, Einstein considered two particles briefly interacting and then flying apart so that their states are correlated, anticipating the phenomenon known as quantum entanglement.

Einstein's early contributions to quantum theory include his heuristic suggestion that light behaves as if it is composed of photons, and his exploration of the quantum structure of the mechanical energies of particles embedded in matter. In 1909, he introduced what was later called the wave-particle duality, the idea that the wave theory of light had to be supplemented by an equally valid yet contradictory quantum theory of light as discrete particles.

           

However, he was strongly opposed to the new version of quantum mechanics developed by Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schroedinger in 1925-26, and from 1926 onwards, Einstein led the opposition to quantum mechanics. He was thus both a major contributor to and a major critic of quantum theory.

            

In the three decades prior to his death, Einstein's distrust of quantum theory isolated him from the mainstream developments in physics. All of his greatest contributions to science had been made by 1926, and from this point on, he remained a staunch opponent of the theory he had done so much to build in his earlier years. Einstein focused his efforts instead on developing a unified field theory, a theory which would explain both gravity and electromagnetism in one principled mathematical account. He hoped to resolve the conflict between the smooth continuum of space-time described by his general theory of relativity, and the jittery submicroscopic particle-world where quantum theory reigns. Although he never succeeded in this endeavor, in a sense he was simply ahead of his time: throughout the 1980s and 1990s, the primary goal of theoretical physicists has been the formulation of a grand theory of everything, or TOE, that would account for every element of physical reality.

(Quantum Theory. Retrieved on November 10 2020 from https://www.sparknotes.com/biography/einstein/section9/ )

/[i]Einstein

Trivia:

Einstein was not comfortable in school as he did not like the style of teaching. He did not believe in the systematic training in the worship of authority and instead promoted individuality and free thinking without any bias. He once stated, “A foolish faith in authority is the worst enemy of truth.” Einstein believed and wished that people should be respected for their humanitarian work and thoughts, and not for their nationality and origin. In this context, expressing his cynicism for nationalistic pride, he once said: “If relativity is proved right, the Germans will call me a German, the Swiss will call me a Swiss citizen, and the French will call me a great scientist. If relativity is proved wrong, the French will call me Swiss, the Swiss will call me a German, and the Germans will call me a Jew.” 

Einstein did not speak until the age of three. He revealed this fact about the delay of his speech abilities to his biographer. Today there is a term, “Einstein Syndrome,” which was coined by Dr. Thomas Sowell, to describe exceptionally bright people whose speech is delayed. Einstein never learned to swim. However, he loved the violin "I often think in music, I live my daydreams in music, I see my life in terms of music." - and sailing and continued to do so as a hobby throughout his life. Also, Einstein never wore socks and hated haircuts. He thought wearing socks was a pain, and he would often get holes in them. 

Einstein could have lived longer: before he died, doctors suggested surgery to him, as he suffered from a burst blood vessel. However, Einstein refused, stating, “It is tasteless to prolong life artificially.” Just after he died in 1955, the recently discovered element with atomic number 99 was given the name ‘einsteinium’ in his honor. 

((2020, July 30). 64 interesting facts about Albert Einstein. Retrieved from https://thefactfile.org/albert-einstein-facts/2/ )