

There are several different ways to build quantum computers, the ones we are interested here are a specific class of quantum computers called “gate model” quantum computers, other types of machines such as photonic chips and quantum annealers are also promising and exciting, but not the subject of the game (at least at this Early Access stage!).

        

<color=green>Types of quantum computers:</color>

There are many ways in which quantum computers can be built and it is not clear now which is the best, or even if there will even be one “best” type as opposed to many types which are good at different things. One of the types which is most often in the news are superconducting circuit quantum computers, like the ones made by IBM, Google, Rigetti, Honeywell, and others. These devices have the advantage that they are built using the same technology which traditional classical computers are built with, but cooled down to much lower temperatures. This makes systems with many qubits relatively easy to make, although there are challenges with controlling a chip with many supercondicting qubits. Measurement and initialisation are relatively straightforward, and so is creating gates. While gates can be done quickly on superconducting circuits, they also lose coherence quickly, so noise is a challenge.

Another type of quantum computers are those being constructed out of trapped atoms or ions, like those being built by IonQ or the NQIT (now QCS) hub in the UK. These are made of atoms or ions which are levitated using light and magnetic fields. Some of these trapped atoms shine brightly enough that it is actually possible to see a single atom with the naked eye! Since it is a new technology, a lot of the scaling aspects are challenging, but these devices can be initialized, measured, and have gates performed on them reliably. The gates on these devices are slower than superconducting qubits, but they also can remain coherent longer.

Photons (particles of light) are also a way to try to build a quantum computer, this is being pursued for example by PsiQuantum. There are many ways to naturally encode qubits into photons, measuring single photons is fairly standard in many labs but making single photon sources is still a challenge. They have the advantage of almost 2 infinite decoherence time unless they are absorbed. A disadvantage is that it is very hard to make the qubits interact, so universal gates are hard to make.

More exotic quantum computers can be built using circuit technologies which use individual silicon atoms as qubits (or nanostructures), rather than superconducting circuitry. Similarly defects in diamonds can be used, or exotic “topological”phases of matter. These ideas all show potential to one day surpass the current leaders, but fundamental challenges need to be addressed before they can be built into mature computing devices.

Many early quantum computing experiments were performed using nuclear magnetic resonance on atoms within molecules. These were exciting systems to play with, but have largely been abandoned since it was not possible to scale them (i.e. no way to add qubits), so they failed on the first criterion.