

Galileo invented it, Einstein understood it, and Eddington saw it.

/[i]gal

Galileo Galilei(Italian astronomer, physicist and engineer, 1564-1642) hit on the idea in 1639, when he showed that a falling object behaves the same way on a moving ship as it does in a motionless building. He is considered the father of modern science.

But Albert Einstein(German theoretical physicist, 1878-1955) did reformulate Galileo’s relativity to deal with the bizarre things that happen at near-light speed, where time slows down and space gets compressed.

Explanation reportedly from The Man Himself: “Put your hand on a hot stove for a minute and it seems like an hour. Sit with a pretty girl for an hour and it seems like a minute. That’s relativity.”

Einstein’s full-time job at the Swiss patent office meant he had to hash out relativity during hours when nobody was watching. He would cram his notes into his desk when a supervisor came by. When he finally completed his theory of relativity, he and his wife, Mileva, drank themselves under the table — the old-fashioned way to mess with the space-time continuum.

Affection is relative. “I need my wife, she solves all the mathematical problems for me,” Einstein wrote while completing his theory in 1904. By 1914, he’d ordered her to “renounce all personal relations with me, as far as maintaining them is not absolutely required for social reasons.”

There are two relativities.Special relativity, which applies to objects moving at constant speed and General relativity, which covers accelerating things and explains how gravity works, that came a decade later and is regarded as Einstein’s truly unique insight.

/[i]eclipse

(Credit: ESO/Landessternwarte Heidelberg-Königstuhl/F. W. Dyson, A. S. Eddington, & C. Davidson) 

      

The Eddington Experiment:

sir Arthur Stanley Eddington(English astronomer, physicist and mathematician, 1882-1944) also a populariser of science announced and explained Einsteins theory. Two expeditions had been conducted to observe the total solar eclipse of 29 May 1919. One carried out to the West African island Príncipe and the other to the Brazilian town Sobral. The aim of the expeditions was to measure the gravitational deflection of starlight passing near the Sun. The value of this deflection had been predicted by Albert Einstein in a 1911 paper, and was one of the tests proposed for his 1915 theory of General Relativity. Following the return of the expeditions, the results were presented by Eddington to the Royal Society of London, and, after some deliberation, were accepted.

Today general relativity is so well understood that it is used to weigh galaxies and locate distant planets by the way they bend light.

Eddington increasingly concentrated on what he called "fundamental theory" which was intended to be a unification of quantum theory, relativity, cosmology, and gravitation. At first he progressed along "traditional" lines, but turned increasingly to an almost numerological analysis of the dimensionless ratios of fundamental constants.

“Today we say that the law of relativity is supposed to be true at all energies, but someday somebody may come along and say how stupid we were.” – Richard P. Feynman

(Kruglinsky,S.(2008, February 25). 20 things you didn´t know about...Relativity. Retrieved from https://www.discovermagazine.com)